Hello again. In this video, we are going to look at managing a thread. So we've learned how to launch
a thread.
Now we are going to learn how to manage it.
So the basic idea is that we have the main thread or possibly some other parent thread which will create a
thread object, and that will cause a child execution thread to run, and that will call some sort of function
that we give it, which will execute in that thread.
We said that we should always call join() to make sure that the parent will stop and wait for the child
to complete.
There is actually an alternative to that, which is to call detach().
In that case, the parent carries on running and ignores the child.
So they both run in their own little universes, if you like.
The detached thread will carry on running until it has completed or the program terminates, and the parent thread
will also continue executing. If you have done any Unix system programming,
this is similar to forking a process and running the child as a daemon.
And I think the Windows equivalent is called a service.
As far as the thread object is concerned, it will have some resources in it which are there in case
it needs to join.
When you call detach() on the thread, these resources are no longer needed and they are released immediately.
If the detached thread is still running when the program ends, the destructor is called for the thread
object and that'll terminate the thread. So everything gets handled properly.
You can visualize it like this.
This is a kind of event diagram, so in the case where we call join(), the parent thread will be
running.
It will create a child thread, the child thread will go off and execute. The parent thread will stop
after it calls join() and wait until the child is completed, and then the parent will start executing again.
In the detach() case, the parent thread will run, it will create a child thread, but the parent
will continue running as well.
So both these threads will be running at the same time.
We also said that when the child thread throws an exception,
it has to be dealt with by that thread.
What happens when the parent throws an exception?
As you would expect, the destructors are called for every object in scope, and that includes any thread
objects.
The destructor for std::thread will carry out a check.
It will check whether join() or detach() have been called on that object.
And if they have, it will go ahead and terminated the execution thread.
If neither of those has been called, the destructor will give up, it will call std::terminate() and that will
probably cause the program to terminate immediately, which is not what we want.
So we must make sure that we call either join() or detach() before the thread gets destroyed.
So this is the kind of code that can cause this problem. We create a thread which is running, we have
some code that can throw an exception, and then we do a join() on the thread.
The problem is, if this code throws an exception, the destructor for the thread object will be called
and then the function will exit the scope [immediately].
So join() never gets called. So when the destructor runs, it will see that join() has not been called and
it will call terminate().
So this is going to abruptly end the program.
The obvious way to address this is to add a try-catch block.
We will put the code that might throw inside a try block and then we have a catch block, which
is going to call join().
So if this code does throw, then the program will jump into the catch block, it will call join(),
and the destructor will be called.
So that will be OK because the destructor will see that the object has already been joined.
If this code does not throw, then the program will jump over the catch block and it will execute
this join() statement here, and then the thread will be destroyed.
So this is all very good and safe, but it's rather verbose. Five lines of code which don't actually
provide any functionality and we have to call join() twice.
So it is certainly not elegant.
If you have done my Advanced Modern C++ course, you may remember something called RAII. This is an idiom
for writing classes that manage resources.
So the idea is that you have the resource as a private data member of the class, you acquire the resource
in the constructor and you release it in the destructor, and you make whatever changes are needed for
the copy and move operators to handle ownership changes correctly.
The great advantage of this is if you have an object of the class on the stack, it will be destroyed
whenever the object goes out of scope or when an exception is thrown.
So regardless of how many return paths there are in your code or how many exceptions get thrown and where,
including ones that you do not know about when you are writing the code, whatever happens in that regard,
the destructor will always be called and the resource would always be released.
So RAII gives you a very strong protection against resource leaks.
In this case, it is slightly different.
We are not worried about resource leaks.
We are worried about threads not being joined before they are destroyed.
But we can solve this as well with RAII.
So we have a thread object as a member of the class and then in the destructor of the class,
we call join() on that object.
We need to be a bit careful here because a thread can only be joined or detached once. If you call join()
twice or call join() and detach(), then that is not going to work.
Fortunately, there is another member function called joinable(), and we can call that to check
whether it is safe to call join().
If join() or detach() have already been called on that object, then this will return false.
So we know that we don't want to call join() again.
Also, if the thread object does not actually have any associated execution thread - it could have been
a default constructed object - then it will return false as well.
We do not want to call join() because there is no execution thread to join to.
And otherwise, it is going to return true.
So in that case, we do need to call join().
So this is what the basic part of the class could look like.
So we have a thread object, which is a private member of this class, and we have the destructor.
So we check if it is joinable.
And if it is joinable, then we call join(). And obviously, if it's not joinable, we do nothing.
We need to get the thread objects into this class so we are going to write a constructor. Now, thread is a move only
object, so this will have to be a move constructor, and we will have to move the argument into our own
variable.
So it will look something like this. thread_guard, the constructor, is going to take a thread by move.
So we need the double ampersands.
And then we get the argument, which is going to be passed as an lvalue.
So we need to cast that back to a rvalue by calling std::move().
We also make the constructor explicit. It is probably not really necessary here, but it is a good idea.
It will avoid any surprising conversions.
(Let's put some comments in here... so join thread if necessary.
Constructor (thread is move-only)
I should say std::thread. So that's the destructor call. Quite often with resource management classes,
we do not want to be able to copy them.
For example, fstreams are not copyable.
In this case, we're writing something which is meant to behave like std::thread.
That's not copyable.
So this should be not copyable as well.
So we're going to delete the copy constructor and copy assignment operator.
However, it might be useful to be able to move these - the std::thread object is movable.
So let's add some move operators.
We wil not get any generated by default because we've already put a destructor in. When there is is a destructor,
The compiler will not generate default
move operators.
But we can provide our own.
We can use the defaults, those will be good enough. Notice of course that the move constructor, does not
take a const argument, because it changes the argument. And usually we make these operators noexcept.
Then the assignment operator.
Okay.
Then to use this class, we need to create a
thread instance.
It does not really matter what it does, this is just a demonstration. Then we create an instance of our thread_guard
class.
Then we move the thread into it... std::move()
And then when the object goes out of scope, the destructor for that will be called.
So the destructor calls are in reverse order.
The thread_guard destructor is called first.
Then once that is run, the destructor for the threat will be called.
So first of all, the thread will be joined, if applicable, then the thread object will be destroyed
and that will terminate the underlying execution threaD.
So it all gets handled.
And in your code, which actually does the work, it just has one extra line of code instead of all that
try-catch boilerplate.
And also this object is reusable.
You can use it anywhere where you want to have a thread and you might have to deal with exceptions or
multiple return paths.
C++20 has an additional class called jthread in the standard library, and the destructor for jthread
will actually do all that for us.
So it will check whether the thread is joinable and it will automatically call it, if it is needed.
So we can rewrite our program without putting any extra code in at all.
I can just create an instance of std::jthread and off it goes.
And finally, stopping threads. In some languages, there are facilities for interrupting or stopping
threads, or killing or cancelling or terminating or various other terms that sound like they were written
by a gangster! C++
does not directly support this.
The book by Williams has a very good interruptible thread class.
So you can use that.
If you want to be "uncivilized", you can go to the operating system. And also things like the pthreads
library and boost have facilities for stopping a thread "with extreme prejudice".
Generally, it is not a good idea to stop a thread dead in its tracks.
The execution thread will get stopped, but the thread object will still be alive.
So you have memory leaks. And you may very well get other problems, such as deadlocks, which we are
going to talk about later on in the course.
jthread in C++20 also supports cooperative interruption. So you can politely ask it whether it wouldn't
mind stopping at some point. There is the request underscore stop member function.
And if you call that, the thread will terminate, but it does not have to. It can wait until it is ready or it
can even not terminate at all.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding.